+++
title = "Comment on Placement of 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine and 2,5-dimethoxy-4-chloroamphetamine in Schedule I"
tags = ["law","politics","psychedelics"]
date = "2023-12-18"
categories = ["opinion"]
menu = "main"
bookToc = true
+++

Drug regulation should not be a criminal matter, but addressed by health care providers. I urge the DEA to drop this attempt to schedule more substances.

1. Personal Liberty: At the heart of the decriminalization movement lies the principle of individual autonomy. Adults should have the right to choose what they put into their own bodies, as long as their actions don't harm others. Criminalizing personal drug use infringes on this fundamental freedom, treating individuals as criminals for making private choices.

2. Harm Reduction: Prohibition has demonstrably failed to curb drug use. Instead, it fuels a dangerous black market controlled by criminal organizations, exposing users to unregulated, tainted substances and increasing violence and instability. Decriminalization, coupled with regulation and quality control, could significantly reduce these harms. Imagine safe consumption spaces, readily available harm reduction tools like clean needles and overdose reversal medication, and readily accessible treatment options, all absent the stigma and fear associated with criminal prosecution.

3. Focus on Treatment: The war on drugs has been a war on people, funneling resources into incarceration rather than treatment. Decriminalization frees up these resources to invest in evidence-based addiction treatment, harm reduction programs, and mental health services. This shift in focus could dramatically improve the lives of individuals struggling with addiction, empowering them to seek help and break free from the cycle of substance abuse.

4. Economic Sense: Prohibition is a colossal drain on taxpayer funds, fueling the prison-industrial complex while generating zero tax revenue. Decriminalization, with regulation and taxation of currently illicit drugs, could turn this equation on its head. Imagine the benefits of channeling these newfound resources towards education, healthcare, and social programs, creating a more equitable and prosperous society.

5. Scientific Accuracy: The current scheduling system often fails to reflect the scientific evidence on the risks and benefits of different drugs. Marijuana, for example, remains classified as a Schedule I drug with "no currently accepted medical use," while opioids, responsible for a devastating overdose crisis, are readily available with prescriptions. Decriminalization allows for a more evidence-based approach, ensuring public safety while acknowledging the potential therapeutic benefits of certain substances.

DEA-2023-0168-0026
